AI #847: Including the Virtual Currency pricing model example for the SaaS appendix (#893)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/appendix/saas_examples/token_based_pricing_currency.md

Reviewer: The file name will need to change to reflect use of the term "virtual currency".  Suggest `virtual_currency_pricing_model.md`.

Reviewer: @rileyjenk changed the file name.  Resolving!

> # SaaS Spend Agreements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Virtual Currency Pricing Model
```

> Many SaaS providers support billing models that utilize a non-standard currency unit such as credits, tokens or points. The provider sells these tokens at a currency rate. Usage of their product consumes these tokens.
> 
> The scenarios described below illustrate how a FOCUS-compliant dataset should look for various scenarios where a provider utilizes this pricing model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many SaaS providers support billing models that utilize a virtual currency such as credits, tokens or points. The provider sells this virtual currency at a particular rate in a national currency such as USD or EUR. Usage of their product consumes this virtual currency.

The scenarios described below illustrate how a FOCUS-compliant dataset should look for various scenarios where a provider utilizes this pricing model.
```

Reviewer 2: nit: avoid using the term **credit** 😄

Reviewer 3: I think credits is fine tbh. It's a very common thing in SaaS and not referencing it is not good I don't think.

Reviewer: Agree with Udam.  While semantically it has an overlap with corrections/refunds, it's certainly a term SaaS providers use to describe their virtual currency.

## Baseline Scenario

The following baseline conditions apply to the scenarios described below:

> * AwesomeCorp has signed an agreement with SaaS provider Acme Co to use their SaaS platform services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* AwesomeCorp has signed an agreement with SaaS provider Acme Co to use their SaaS platform services.
```

> * Acme Co offers a token-based pricing model for their services, requiring a purchase of tokens in advance of usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Acme Co offers a virtual currency pricing model for their services, requiring a purchase of tokens in advance of usage.
```

* Acme Co requires purchase of additional tokens in the event of usage exceeding purchased tokens.
* Acme Co publicly lists the cost of their tokens at &dollar;2 per token.
* Acme Co publicly lists their usage to token rates. These rates are as follows:
  * 1 Q Widget Execution = 1 token
  * 1 Z Widget Execution = 2 tokens
  * 1 Workflow Operation = 3 tokens

> ## Scenario A: Tokens Not Offered at a Discount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scenario A: Virtual Currency Not Offered at a Discount
```

For this scenario, contract terms include the following terms in addition to the baseline scenario mentioned above:

> * Acme Corp offers no discount for purchased tokens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Acme Corp offers no discount for purchased tokens.
```

> ## Scenario A1: Initial Purchase of Tokens Non Discounted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scenario A1: Purchase of Virtual Currency Without a Discount
```

> For this scenario for the initial purchase of tokens the purchase executed is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this scenario for the initial purchase of virtual currency the purchase executed is as follows:
```

* On April 1, 2025, AwesomeCorp agrees to purchase 100,000 tokens at &dollar;2 per token for a total spend &dollar;200,000. These tokens are only valid for 12 months.

> **Example FOCUS dataset:** [Initial Purchase of Tokens without a Discount](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1kQTDK3Sk9BnNcn6Ovyaa37T1aMaXfHaDahsuk1Notn4/edit?gid=1940546788#gid=1940546788&range=2:3)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example FOCUS dataset:** [Initial Purchase of Virtual Currency Without a Discount](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1kQTDK3Sk9BnNcn6Ovyaa37T1aMaXfHaDahsuk1Notn4/edit?gid=1940546788#gid=1940546788&range=2:3)
```

Note the following details in the dataset:

* The Charge Period is April 1st 2025 - April 1st 2026. The Billing Period is the month of April 2025 (when the licenses were ordered) and therefore will appear in the April invoice.

> * Because Acme Co uses token based pricing for usage and publishes their token price in terms of dollars and their usage cost in terms of tokens, their FOCUS dataset includes the columns PricingCurrency,PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice, PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost, and PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Because Acme Co uses a virtual currency pricing model for usage and publishes their token price in terms of dollars and their usage cost in terms of tokens, their FOCUS dataset includes the columns PricingCurrency,PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice, PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost, and PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice.
```

* A single charge representing the total payment for the initial token purchase agreement (&dollar;200,000) is charged in the first invoice.

>   * ListCost, BilledCost, and Contracted cost of the purchase are all represented in this charge, however EffectCost is zero since the tokens are not yet consumed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * ListCost, BilledCost, and ContractedCost of the purchase are all represented in this charge, however EffectiveCost is zero since the tokens are not yet consumed.
```

> * Pricing Quantity is set to the total tokens purchased

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Pricing Quantity is set to the total tokens purchased.
```

> * Because Awesome Corp is paying the list price ListUnitPrice and ContractedUnitPrice are all set to the same value of &dollar;2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Because Awesome Corp is paying the list price, ListUnitPrice and ContractedUnitPrice are all set to the same value of &dollar;2.
```

> ## Scenario A2: Usage of Tokens that were Purchased Without a Discount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scenario A2: Usage of Virtual Currency Purchased Without a Discount
```

Awesome Corp uses ACME's services consuming tokens as follows in the first day:
* 245 executions of Q Widget

> * 5 executions of Z widget

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 5 executions of Z Widget
```

* 120 operations of Workflow

> **Example FOCUS dataset:** [Usage of Tokens that were Purchased Without a Discount](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1kQTDK3Sk9BnNcn6Ovyaa37T1aMaXfHaDahsuk1Notn4/edit?gid=1940546788#gid=1940546788&range=5:8)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example FOCUS dataset:** [Usage of Virtual Currency Purchased Without a Discount](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1kQTDK3Sk9BnNcn6Ovyaa37T1aMaXfHaDahsuk1Notn4/edit?gid=1940546788#gid=1940546788&range=5:8)
```

Note the following details in the dataset:

* The Charge Period is April 1st 2025 - April 2nd 2025. The Billing Period is the month of April 2025.

> * PricingCurrency for these usage charges reflects the per usage token price of the particular usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* PricingCurrency for these usage charges reflects the per usage token price of the particular usage.
```

> * PricingQuantity Reflects the amount of usage of the Pricing Unit for each charge and is equivalent to consumed quantity. While this is relevant to this example there are scenarios including tiered pricing where ConsumedQuantity and PricingQuantity may not be the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* PricingQuantity reflects the amount of usage of the PricingUnit for each charge and is equivalent to ConsumedQuantity. While this is relevant to this example, there are scenarios including tiered pricing where ConsumedQuantity and PricingQuantity may not be the same.
```

* Because Awesome Corp's usage includes no discount on usage to token rates, PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice and PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice are equivalent.

> ## Scenario B: Tokens offered at a Discount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scenario B: Virtual Currency Offered at a Discount
```

For this scenario, contract terms include the following terms in addition to the baseline scenario mentioned above:

> * Acme Corp offers a discount for purchased tokens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Acme Corp offers a discount for purchased tokens.
```

> ## Scenario B1: Initial Purchase of Tokens at a Discount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scenario B1: Initial Purchase of Virtual Currency at a Discount
```

> For this scenario for the initial purchase of tokens the purchase executed is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this scenario for the initial purchase of virtual currency the purchase executed is as follows:
```

* On April 1, 2025, AwesomeCorp agrees to purchase 100,000 tokens at &dollar;1 per token for a total spend &dollar;100,000. These tokens are only valid for 12 months.

> **Example FOCUS dataset:** [Initial Purchase of Tokens at a Discount](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1kQTDK3Sk9BnNcn6Ovyaa37T1aMaXfHaDahsuk1Notn4/edit?gid=1940546788#gid=1940546788&range=11:12)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example FOCUS dataset:** [Initial Purchase of Virtual Currency at a Discount](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1kQTDK3Sk9BnNcn6Ovyaa37T1aMaXfHaDahsuk1Notn4/edit?gid=1940546788#gid=1940546788&range=11:12)
```

Note the following details in the dataset:

* The Charge Period is April 1st 2025 - April 1st 2026. The Billing Period is the month of April 2025 (when the licenses were ordered) and therefore will appear in the April invoice.

> * Because Acme Co uses token based pricing for usage and publishes their token price in terms of dollars and their usage cost in terms of tokens, their FOCUS dataset includes the columns PricingCurrency,PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice, PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost, and PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Because Acme Co uses a virtual currency pricing model for usage and publishes their token price in terms of dollars and their usage cost in terms of tokens, their FOCUS dataset includes the columns PricingCurrency,PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice, PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost, and PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice.
```

* A single charge representing the total payment for the initial token purchase agreement (&dollar;100,000) is charged in the first invoice.

>   * ListCost, BilledCost, and Contracted cost of the purchase are all represented in this charge, however EffectCost is zero since the tokens are not yet consumed.

Reviewer 2: see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/893/files#r2048990139) for reasoning

```suggestion
  * ListCost, BilledCost, and ContractedCost of the purchase are all represented in this charge, however EffectiveCost is zero, as required for prepaid purchases.
```

> * Pricing Quantity is set to the total tokens purchased

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Pricing Quantity is set to the total tokens purchased.
```

* Because Awesome Corp is receiving a discount on the token price, the ListUnitPrice is set to &dollar;2 and the ContractedUnitPrice is set to &dollar;1. A ListCost of (&dollar;200,000) and ContractedCost (&dollar;100,000) reflect the cost of the tokens at the list price and contracted price respectively. The BilledCost is set to &dollar;100,000 since this is the amount that Awesome Corp will be charged for the purchase of tokens.

> ## Scenario B2: Usage of Tokens that were Purchased at a Discount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scenario B2: Usage of Virtual Currency Purchased at a Discount
```

> Awesome Corp uses ACME's services consuming tokens as follows in the first day:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Awesome Corp uses Acme's services, consuming tokens as follows in the first day:
```

* 245 executions of Q Widget

> * 5 executions of Z widget

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 5 executions of Z Widget
```

* 120 operations of Workflow

> **Example FOCUS dataset:** [Usage of Tokens that were Purchased at a Discount](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1kQTDK3Sk9BnNcn6Ovyaa37T1aMaXfHaDahsuk1Notn4/edit?gid=1940546788#gid=1940546788&range=14:17)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example FOCUS dataset:** [Usage of Virtual Currency Purchased at a Discount](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1kQTDK3Sk9BnNcn6Ovyaa37T1aMaXfHaDahsuk1Notn4/edit?gid=1940546788#gid=1940546788&range=14:17)
```

Note the following details in the dataset:

> * PricingQuantity Reflects the amount of usage of the Pricing Unit for each charge and is equivalent to consumed quantity. While this is relevant to this example there are scenarios including tiered pricing where ConsumedQuantity and PricingQuantity may not be the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* PricingQuantity feflects the amount of usage of the PricingUnit for each charge and is equivalent to ConsumedQuantity. While this is relevant to this example, there are scenarios including tiered pricing where ConsumedQuantity and PricingQuantity may not be the same.
```

Reviewer 2: typo: 

**feflects** instead of **reflects**

Reviewer: Ty @ijurica!  Edited.

* Because Awesome Corp's usage includes no discount on usage to token rates, PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice and PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice are equivalent.

> ## Scenario B3: Usage of Tokens that were Purchased at a Discount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scenario B3: Usage of Virtual Currency at a Modified Rate
```

> Awesome Corp uses ACME's services consuming tokens as follows in the first day:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Awesome Corp uses Acme's services consuming tokens as follows in the first day:
```

* 245 executions of Q Widget
* 5 executions of Z widget
* 120 operations of Workflow

Additionally, Acme Co offers a modified usage to token ratio for one of their services as follows:
* 1 Workflow Operation = 2 tokens

> **Example FOCUS dataset:** [Usage of Tokens with a Modified Rate](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1kQTDK3Sk9BnNcn6Ovyaa37T1aMaXfHaDahsuk1Notn4/edit?gid=1940546788#gid=1940546788&range=19:22)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example FOCUS dataset:** [Usage of Virtual Currency at a Modified Rate](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1kQTDK3Sk9BnNcn6Ovyaa37T1aMaXfHaDahsuk1Notn4/edit?gid=1940546788#gid=1940546788&range=19:22)
```

Note the following details in the dataset:

* Because of the modified rate for Workflow Operations, the PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice and PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice are different for this charge. The ContractedUnitPrice is set to &dollar;1 and the ListUnitPrice is set to &dollar;2.
* The PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost is 240 tokens for this charge, which is less that example B2 above due to the modified rate.

> * ListCost reflects the cost of the charge at both the list cost and the list usage to token ratio.

Author: Which line, after the commits 108 is an empty line

> * ListCost reflects the cost of the charge at both the list cost and the list usage to token ratio.

Reviewer: It's 115, the line this comment is on.

> * ListCost reflects the cost of the charge at both the list cost and the list usage to token ratio.

> * ListCost reflects the cost of the charge at both the list cost and the list usage to token ratio.

Author: got it.

> ## Scenario C: Handling Overages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scenario C: Handling Virtual Currency Usage Overages
```

> For this scenario, Awesome Corp has exceeded their purchased tokens on October 1st 2025 by 1500 tokens and Acme Co has charged them for the overage. The following conditions apply:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this scenario, Awesome Corp has exceeded their purchased tokens on October 1st 2025 by 1,500 tokens and Acme Co has charged them for the overage. The following conditions apply:
```

> * Acme Co has charged Awesome Corp for the cost of tokens at the list price of &dollar;2 per token and this purchase is effective from April 1st 2025 to The date of the Purchase October 1st 2025.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Acme Co has charged Awesome Corp for the cost of tokens at the list price of &dollar;2 per token and this purchase is effective from April 1st 2025 to the date of the Purchase October 1st 2025.
```

> * Acme Co has charged Awesome Corp for the cost of tokens at the list price of &dollar;2 per token and this purchase is effective from April 1st 2025 to the date of the Purchase October 1st 2025.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Acme Co has charged Awesome Corp for the cost of tokens at the list price of &dollar;2 per token, and this purchase is effective from April 1st 2025 to the date of the purchase, October 1st 2025.
```

> * Awesome Corp purchases an additional 25,000 token to facilitate usage to the end of their contract. These tokens are valid from October 1st 2025 to March 30th 2026.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Awesome Corp purchases an additional 25,000 tokens to facilitate usage to the end of their contract. These tokens are valid from October 1st 2025 to March 30th 2026.
```

> **Example FOCUS dataset:** [Handling Overages](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1kQTDK3Sk9BnNcn6Ovyaa37T1aMaXfHaDahsuk1Notn4/edit?gid=1940546788#gid=1940546788&range=25:27)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example FOCUS dataset:** [Handling Virtual Currency Usage Overages](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1kQTDK3Sk9BnNcn6Ovyaa37T1aMaXfHaDahsuk1Notn4/edit?gid=1940546788#gid=1940546788&range=25:27)
```

Note the following details in the dataset:

> * The Charge Period for the Overage Purchase is April 1st 2025 - October 1st 2025. This is because the overage charge is to cover the period of time the overage token purchase is applicable to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The Charge Period for the Initial Purchase is April 1st 2025 - October 1st 2025. This is because the overage charge is to cover the period of time the overage token purchase is applicable to.
```

Reviewer: @ijurica I disagree -- the original verbiage is correct.  This is a purchase to cover the overage.

Reviewer 2: you are right! my bad :(

Reviewer: Np.  Resolving.

> * The Charge Period for the Additional Purchase is October 1st 2025 - April 1st 2026. This is because the additional purchase is to cover the period of time the additional token purchase is applicable to. Because end dates are exclusive a ChargePeriodEnd is April 1st 2026.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Charge Period for the Additional Purchase is October 1st 2025 - April 1st 2026. This is because the additional purchase is to cover the period of time to which the additional token purchase is applicable. Because end dates are exclusive, ChargePeriodEnd is April 1st 2026.
```
